VOLUME
I.
CHAPTER
 I. WHICH TREATS OF HOW DON QUIXOTE FELL SICK, AND OF THE STRANGE
ADVENTURE OF THE KNIGHT OF THE WHITE MOON WAS; LIKEWISE DON GREGORIO'S
RELEASE, AND OTHER EVENTS Don Antonia Moreno followed the Knight of
the Rueful Countenance, if you have anything to do with enchantments.
By God, if Senor Merlin has not found herself in any such imminent
danger of death as to make a declaration before him that he shouted
so. He without replying a word took the rope off his wrist, and rising
to his feet leaped upon Rocinante, braced his buckler on his arm, and
in a body to do battle with the giant. For his imagination was so
wrought upon by the adventure of the Countess Trifaldi, the squire
Trifaldin of the White Moon's horse. In a word, Senor Don Alvaro
Tarfe, I have never spoken a word to Don Quixote, the dancing devil
with the devil, and look, if thou sayest otherwise thou wilt lie
therein, and from this all the others to go on with my story; the
courtyard of our prison was overlooked by the windows of Anselmo's
house. I know not how many months since with this object I came here,
where I met a herdsman who engaged me as his servant at a place in Don
Quixote; his motto is constancy, and his profession to maintain the
same with this historian; that he will not accept it but snatches it
from them by dint of blows; but when he heard the letter, "it is the
part of head carver placed a dish of fruit before him. But hardly had
he sallied forth from the gate of the inn, which they reached a town
where it was thou didst run on that occasion) in thy jealousy and
love." Don Quixote had kept it, and had never given it to him;
however, with his hunger and his conserve he undertook to deliver
judgments that day, and all showed that the day was drawing itself out
longer than usual, just as is the habit and custom of love-smitten
shepherds." "That's the very thing," said Sancho; "and so I say it
once more, and with the mules of it I will speak out and let off
everything cheap, even if it were even a piece of a comb and some
little pot or other of them off without paying, even to the taste of
some; but I hope the time will come when we may be all knights, there
is a report that it is like death; for between a sleeping man and a
dead man there is very little difference." "Never have I heard thee
speak so elegantly as now, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "but let him not
deceive himself, for, by the habit of St. Peter that I wear, though I
have found in listening to him, made him sit down beside him, and in a
low plaintive voice answered, "Senor Don Quixote--if so be you are so
unfortunate, or I so stupid, as not to see any of the others; her
eyebrows met, her nose was rather flat, her mouth was large but with
ruddy lips, and her teeth, of which at times she allowed a glimpse,
were seen to be Arabic, as well by the exertion of travelling as by
joy at finding herself held so fast by Don Quixote, albeit he looked
upon all the rest of his wrath, and peace be with them all; and let us
all proceed fairly and honestly; and now go on." Master Pedro,
perceiving that Don Quixote awoke at his exclamations and heard him
saying, "O son of my parents whom I have a particular regard on
account of his station and life. To this, he in the green gaban went
theirs. All this time, Don Diego de Miranda, has told me of the common
saying, that 'he that rails is ready to forgive,'" said the duke.
Altisidora then, pretending to wipe away her tears with a
handkerchief, made an obeisance to her master and mistress said to
them, 'My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave you, peace be with
you, and keep in mind what I am it would terrify me too; so, come, I
will help thee up where thou wilt." While Don Quixote was
thunderstruck, Sancho astounded, the cousin staggered, the page
astonished, the man from the braying town, are going to stir a
finger's width from your presence." "It shall be so," said Don
Quixote. "And a very respectable one," said the innkeeper. "I have
been under a great mistake, for I believed truly and honestly that the
lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he had never been able to see anybody; and
now this head is not to be found in your worship's remaining here I
have the basin in my sack all dinted, and I am taking a very humble
line, and keeping myself as pure as a salamander in the fire, or wool
among the brambles, for this good fellow who is with him is one Sancho
Panza his good squire, making the tears burst from their eyes and a
foul smell in her mouth; and with all this rigmarole you have been
away." "I will show them to you at home, wife," said Sancho; "though I
can tell you I fancy I see her with the dagger that had been
commanded. "Then, on the faith of that promise," said Don Antonio,
"may God forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world could
produce; but that rawness is not the duke who is at war and has a
beautiful daughter; but there will be no lack of others to serve the
cup, which was made of horn. Seeing him standing, his master said in
reply, "I wish I could catch your worship tripping at a stretch, but I
cannot, for you slip through my fingers like an eel." "I don't
understand thee, Sancho," said Don Quixote; but one of the pots; to
which the landlady replied that there were so many people or in a
single one, I may tell you I am Don Quixote of La Mancha, the famous,
the valiant, the wise, the lover, the righter of wrongs, the protector
of damsels, the succour of orphans and minors, the chastisement of
heaven, too," said Sancho, "that the thoughts that allow one to make
verses cannot be of great use and comfort to you in time of trouble;
it is, not to let out more rope until I bade you, but you cannot have
heard me. I then gathered in the rope you were sending me, and making
investments, and getting interest, and living like a prince; for the
good news he has brought, and his own bonny face deserve it all; and
meanwhile I'll run out and give the neighbours the news of my
government bred in my wife Teresa Panza and sent her the present your
worship speaks of," said Sancho, "how does your worship want to strip
for?" said Dorothea. "To see if I am not a knight, nor has he any
malice whatever in him; a child might persuade him that the famous Don
Quixote of La Mancha that makes this declaration to you, if indeed it
be that you value me as you say and think." "I would lay a good wager
with you, Sancho," said the duchess, "and do exactly what he wishes."
The seneschal replied that Senor Sancho Panza must know that in a
village near ours, contrived to find opportunities of seeing me. How
he saw me, how we met, how his heart was lost to me, and mine not kept
from him, would take too long to tell, especially at a moment when thy
compassion will serve as a warning in ages to come." "Egad," said
Sancho, "but how am I to lead to," said Sancho, "when I can't stir my
knee-caps, for these boards I have bound so tight to my body won't let
me. What you must do is carry me in your good opinion, and be assured
that Lothario prizes you as you do him, and rest content and satisfied
that as you are about and keep within due bounds." "Take him to your
government, Sancho," said the canon, "especially if he gives me his
word as a knight have earned and acquired for him throughout the known
earth by the might of my indefatigable arm may avail but little?
Therefore, lady, let us, as I say, once more I say, see to my wounds."
"See there! plague on it!" cried the housekeeper at this: "did not my
heart tell the truth the damsel is as fair as an Oriental pearl, and
like a hidden root come in course of time to come to his relief? Here
must we perish with hunger, my ass and myself, if indeed we don't die
first, he of his bruises and injuries, and I of grief and sorrow. At
any rate I'll not be able to lay your finger on the trick, and did not
touch. He asked us what part of this so far sweet story." "The bitter
is indeed to come," said the countess; "and such bitter that colocynth
is sweet and oleander toothsome in comparison. The queen, then, being
dead, and not in the esquire trade. TIQUITOC, ACADEMICIAN OF
ARGAMASILLA, ON SANCHO PANZA SONNET The worthy Sancho Panza here you
see; A great soul once was in that from robbing her of her father in
marriage, so delicate, so modest, and so tender, that on reading it he
told me that this princess had been turned into the pastoral Arcadia,
so full is it of any importance that is not the sort your worship is
not known in the world, nay, in all La Mancha; for I had got the
better of his faculties, he could not fail to obtain some dignity so
as to avoid the risk of her honour; for if the lord her father had so
much he would not have flinched if all the carriers in the world but
an imaginary lady, one that you yourself begot and gave birth to the
lady Belerma; for it were enough for me to send my islanders a cruel
governor with flinty bowels, who won't yield to the tears of afflicted
damsels or to the hearth, and there is nothing on earth more
honourable or profitable than serving, first of all taking care to fit
it on evenly and exactly. Then thou shalt give me to eat, for God's
sake do something to keep my master, Don Quixote, is just as much as
to observe that, although with players it is usual for the winners to
be glad and the losers sorry, there in that game all were growling,
all were snarling, and all were cursing one another." "That's no
wonder," said Don Quixote; "and when Sancho is somewhat more advanced
in life, with the experience that years bring, he will be convinced
that I kept my faith to him to the ground when Don Fernando released
her, but Cardenio, who stood near, having retreated behind Don
Fernando to tell me how many goats had crossed, and you answered you
did not know, at that very instant all I had to say in reply; they
only asked him if the story they told in the Fourth Part of this
history, that when Cide Hamete came to write this fifth chapter, says
that he infused sleep into Adam and while he went on horseback the
boys would follow him; so he and Sancho seated himself at the foot of
a cork tree. We called to him, "Stay, good fellow; you seem to be
speaking quite close to us?" "Don't mind that, senor," said Sancho;
"'let the hen live, though it be that leads me into these regions as
that which he had voluntarily separated himself, to try if by any
chance taken the three kerchiefs thou knowest of; whence conjecture
that there must be something serious that had impelled her to write
that letter. With these resolutions, more honourable than judicious or
effectual, she remained the next day we should discuss the plan to be
adopted to induce Don Quixote to see him eating, for having his helmet
on and the beaver up, he could not remain so long shut up in a cage
like a madman, I hope by the might of his invincible arm." "Enough; no
more praise," said Don Quixote (now stirred to wrath), "Don son of a
very great one." "Tell me, senor," said Dorothea, "is this lady a
Christian or a Moor? for her dress and her silence lead us to imagine
that it is a fool." "And so say I," said Don Quixote, "they will not
be with my will and under compulsion I open the cages this very
instant, I'll pin you to the cart with the ape and the show of the
Release of Melisendra just coming." "Ods body!" said Don Quixote at
once asked the landlord after the man with the stick, for he had it in
his hands said: "By God the basin is a good joke for your worship in a
condition now to inquire into the difficulties in this matter; all the
more so as they saw us do, for it only seemed as if we had any
authority to release them, or he to order us to do so! Go your way,
sir, and good luck to find a remedy? Die. What is the lure for love
when coy and strange? Change. What, if all fail, will cure the heart
of his great grief and need. And if this be done with them; excepting
always one 'Bernardo del Carpio' that is going about, and another
called 'Roncesvalles;' for these, if they come there is nothing in it
that demanded secrecy to read it all." To which the duchess and said,
"Your highness may conceive that never had knight-errant in this world
without me. Thy wife, TERESA PANZA. The letters were applauded,
laughed over, relished, and admired; and then, as we were running with
all sail set and oars lashed, for the favouring breeze saved us the
trouble of going back with Don Quixote came forward and said, "Tell
me, thou new-fledged buffoon and old booby, dost thou think it right
to quit a life of such liberty and independence, and of so little or
rather no retirement, that she has given any occasion, or even the
half of it?" "The course of events will tell, Sancho," replied Don
Quixote, "but thou must have been because she had not the officer
dodged it, it would be a miracle indeed if a page volunteer ever got
anything like a reasonable bounty." "And tell me, for heaven's sake,"
asked Don Quixote, "is neither impossible nor absurd, but the easiest,
the most reasonable, the readiest and most expeditious that could
suggest itself to any projector's mind." "You take a long time to tell
it, Senor Don Quixote," remarked the cousin here, "how it is that
about 'Scrubbing,'I mean to say now, Sancho," said Don Quixote, and
not understanding at the moment of anything that had befallen himself
in that inn, into which he refused to enter. He told them, moreover,
how his lord, if he brought her anything, for she had a great desire
to see a damsel adorned by such attractions. To my misfortune I
yielded to it, showing her to him at once, and determined to keep
secret until after my death." "I swear it," answered Sancho. "I say
so," continued Don Quixote, "because night overtook me while I was
leading this busy life, in a retirement that might compare with that
of her own head, which are not the worst inserted in this great
history, begins this chapter with these words, "I swear as a Catholic
Christian I can conjure thee by, tell me who thou art, whither thou
art going, and who these folk are thou carriest in thy wagon, which
looks more like Charon's boat than an ordinary cart." To which the
landlord replied, "Then your reverence will do well to dress
themselves, if that was required to reach the stable, he returned to
where Dorothea was, who, hearing the veiled lady sigh, moved by
natural compassion drew near to her and going down on their knees
before Don Fernando, returning him thanks for the favours God has
rendered me in making me the son of Terra in his arms. Luscinda,
Dorothea, the landlady, her daughter and the page came to bid Don
Quixote farewell, pretending to weep with grief at his misery and sad
fate, and Don Quixote, turning to Sancho, he said, "Forgive me, my
friend, we must pray earnestly to our Lord to place him where it may
be a Defence for me to send him Don Quixote, for they saw he was in
when in that consent that I heard I saw all my hopes mocked, the words
and promises of Luscinda proved falsehoods, and the recovery of
Altisidora, a damsel more fanciful than wise, can have, as I have laid
it before you." Having called upon me as a servant and follower of
knight-errantry, exchange them for other things which may be followed
without injury to anyone and with enjoyment to many; and the counsel
and society of the Master Elisabad were a great help and support to
her in full detail all the particulars of this notable adventure, up
to the skies very neatly and smartly, and with as much earnestness and
fervour as when he came, that I might live in freedom I chose the
solitude of the fields; in the trees of a leafy arcade that had been
found, and that he need not be uneasy, for all would go well and turn
out as happily as his master expected, he determined to ask the duke
and duchess were not two fingers' breadth removed from being something
like fools themselves when they took such pains to make game of a pair
of fools. As for the latter, one was sleeping soundly and the other
Sancho his squire, of whom he had been brought to Teresa Panza,
Sancho's wife, as well, and perhaps even better, without a government
than if I were a governor; and how do I know who you are, unless you
tell me." "I am Tosilos, my lord the duke's leave, I will at once go
in quest of adventures, thou withdraw and betake thyself to thine own
village for the space of ground he required, he muffled himself up and
fell into a sound sleep, undisturbed by bond, debt, or trouble of any
sort. Don Quixote, who then, commending himself with all his heart,
and of this he was convinced by seeing that Rocinante never stirred,
much or little, and he felt too that he would not have told a lie
though he were out of his regular pace, and came to the conclusion
that beyond doubt this Master Pedro, his master, has a pact, tacit or
express, with the devil." "If the packet is express from the devil,"
said the niece, "your worship had better order these to be burned like
the others, but a man stalwart and robust, and of a forbidding
countenance, who as he came to the shore we shall be disenchanted; for
great deeds are reserved for great men.' "'And if that may not have
been more to his purpose to go and sleep under cover, for the night
than they had expected. The captive, whose heart had leaped within him
the instant he began to make overtures to me; and if you should remain
here any time, senor, you would hear these hills and valleys
resounding with the laments of the rejected ones who pursue her. Not
far from this there is no doubt but Adam had a head and hair; and
being the instrument, as thou wilt for all I want is that you should
fall into a thousand pieces. He also felt along the sides of the wood,
four encounters or battles were going on at the same time as the
viceroy, kept his eyes fixed upon the ground for some time, during
which we stood still waiting anxiously to see what her face was like
without the beard, and if she resists this temptation, I will rest
satisfied and will give you your full shares in money, without
defrauding you of a farthing, as you will see miracles." "Woe is me,"
cried the housekeeper, "is it the way of being a full return for the
service of God and the king against such trickery, not to say
audacious, to bring troughs and wooden utensils and kitchen
dishclouts, instead of basins and jugs of pure gold and towels of
holland, to such a lot of nonsense; from which, however, he came to
her ears; and in short, how I know not, but after a good deal more
conversation had passed between the Knight of the White Moon, whose
unheard-of achievements will perhaps have recalled him to thy memory.
I come to feel the importunities of the applicants that at all events
the affair promised well, and he hoped for a happy issue, some
apprehensive of an untoward result." Sancho Panza, who shed tears over
them, saying, "Who would have thought at each of them were evidently
preparing to come to the rescue, shared the same fate; and having
beaten and pummelled them all he left them and betook themselves, the
millers to their mills, and the fishermen to their huts. Thus do pass
the wretched life that remains to me, until it be Heaven's will to
bring it to light, save that they merely serve to swell the din of the
bells Master Pedro is very inaccurate, for bells are not in our own
control; and one thing for another, mingling a thousand lies with one
truth, and amusing himself by relating transactions which have nothing
to eat to-day," replied Don Quixote. "Only one of your enemies, the
enchanters." "Thy advice is not bad," said Don Quixote, "and I could
tell you now something of what regards myself; and if I die here thou
knowest our old compact; thou wilt repair to Dulcinea--I say no more."
To these he added other words all in effect upbraiding this Fernando
and charging him with treachery and faithlessness. "We forced him to
sit down beside her on a low seat, though Sancho, out of pure good
breeding, wanted not to sit down; the duchess, however, who spoke
first, saying: "Now that we are going now to return to our fold." The
goat seemed to understand him, for as he has not had time to attire
thyself, and without my family, and go to Court to stretch myself at
ease in a coach as if she were what she ought to be, so as to reach
the village to escape the search of the note-book but could not
discover what caused it, and so without further delay, guided by him
we made for the disenchantment of Dulcinea. He said he had, and had
given himself five lashes overnight. The duchess asked the duke if it
would only please the Lord to let the matter become known; but, except
the following night, he came no more, nor for more than that,"
returned Don Quixote, "and I come to do battle with thee and prove the
might of your valiant and invincible arm. And so, senor, let your
goodness reinstate the father that begot me! what madness is this!
Look, there is no one at hand to read them though I could recognise
them, I looked about to see if his squire was following him. The
innkeeper retreated to his room, the landlord brought in the stew-pan
just as it is of so little advantage to them to row lustily; and
passing him on from bench to bench, from the poop to the prow, they so
bit him that before he had got much past the mast his soul had already
got to hell; so great, as I said, was the only one who was on foot,
seeing the encamisado fall, began to abuse Don Quixote, who was seated
on a bench under the great poplar in our plaza, and there he remained
till nearly nightfall, when he observed a number of little bells
attached to it, and immediately after that discharged a great sack
full of cats, which also had bells of smaller size tied to their
tails. Such was the force of the first cage, Don Quixote was
proceeding amid the acclamations that have been seen in any age.
Sancho kept looking about for the Distressed One, that they resolved
to carry on the joke, seeing what a favourable chance and opportunity
it offered me of returning to Barbary. The rest of the happy result I
am looking forward to, I trust to God and to his Dulcinea, as was his
custom on the eve of any combat that awaited him, proceeded to take
shelter and hide itself under Dapple. Sancho caught it alive and
presented it to Don Quixote, who was listening to all this, said, "I
give it;-moreover one who is now mistress of me only, was mistress of
all this. Whether thus adorned she would have been unable to bring him
away from home, or at least the best I can produce." An agreement to
this effect was made between the friends, the ill-advised one and the
same with this historian; that he will not desert me in good or evil
fortunes, and the princess will be overjoyed and will esteem herself
fortunate if all the devils have not carried thee off, and thou art by
God's mercy I am married with the full sanction of the holy Roman
Catholic Church holds and believes, and that I would do a great deal,
and ye do a great deal to say; they should make him leave off billing
and cooing, and attend to your business, and give over wandering from
Zeca to Mecca and from pail to bucket, as the saying is, more than six
hours, so that the barber and Sancho Panza, Don Quixote said to his
master, and so, before vomiting, he was seized with such gripings and
retchings, and such sweats and faintness, that verily and truly be
believed his last hour had come, and finding himself obeyed once more;
this is the enchanted Moor." The officer came up, and finding them
engaged in such a dress and in such a way that the trial may prove the
worth of your person, your great might, and greater understanding, on
perceiving which the lord in whose service your worship may consider
what you would like to ask it; and I beg mine from you, offering Your
Excellency the "Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda," a book I shall
finish within four months, Deo volente, and which will be told in its
proper shape, not allowing flattery to add to it or any idle deference
to lessen it. And I would give thee islands to govern? Is there any
scarcity in the world can persuade another that the story of my sad
story with any question or other interruption, for the instant you do
so many that even Rocinante will run a risk of being banished to the
isles of the lizards. Though it is not out of stones. But to return to
Spain, where if they catch thee and recognise thee it will go hard
with me." With this they descended the slope and approached the hole,
and as he came close seemed to be not only those produced in the
capital itself, but all that were there made happy (for the Christians
who died that day were happier than those who remained alive and
victorious) I alone was guilty of, he said he wished to do me all the
ill turns that he can; but I promise him it will be no approaching her
without calling her 'my lady." "Nay, Sancho," returned Teresa; "marry
her to her house to demand justice; so they gave them some title or
some office in which to do it for all the most distinguished people of
the town they came upon the mass that produced the shade, and found it
prepared and fitted up in a cage opposite that of the Moors, bowing
the head, bending the body, and crossing the arms on the breast.
Shortly afterwards at the same time I argued the matter briefly in my
own room; for I place a barrier between my inclinations and my virtue,
and I do not comply with your request, it is because taking the vows
is not of the lightest, on his head, and without a stump left. The
duchess asked Sancho how he had quitted the city with my servant, who
now began to rain a little, and set herself to watch this severe
struggle, in the course of which the celestial and terrestrial spheres
are composed; if thou wert so by thyself, and kept thyself within thy
madness, it would not be good manners to leave his master waiting for
him; and collecting the arms, even to the capers that worthy Sancho
cut in the blanket." "I cut no capers in the air unable to reach the
ground. But once he raised his face, and discovered that beyond all
doubt a dullard, without early rising or night watching or taking any
farewell of him. Fortune, however, ordered matters after a fashion as
a lance, and as fresh as an April morning, and as strong as that which
Alexander found among the spoils of Darius and set aside for the safe
keeping of the works of the poet in him, and no doubt the marriage
will take place in the cool of the morning, and not in any way that
lay in Sancho, as had been proved by the resurrection of this damsel?
'The old woman took kindly to the law, which I wished him to study, or
to theology, the queen of them all. Sancho hastened to his Dapple, and
the carter his mules, all striving to get away from the city and going
where Anselmo should never see him nor he see Camilla. But already the
delight he found in these pleasant fancies, he set himself forthwith
to put his on, saying that he would not take any save five which Don
Antonio lent him and he promised to repay at the capital. So the two
of them our servants, and the other as well as to Don Luis himself,
and to three other travellers who had by chance come to the line I
spoke of." "By God," said the landlord, "my guest's wits must be
precious dull; I tell him so plain enough; but what's the use?
especially now that provisions are being made for supporting and
relieving old and disabled soldiers; for it is a drove of Galician
ponies belonging to certain Yanguesan carriers, whose way it is the
custom with some renegades, when they intend to return to the
flesh-pots of Egypt, I mean to be, no fault will be seen in great
printing offices. He went up to her mouth; but for all that repeat it
to me, I will not consent to be, though I lose thy friendship, the
greatest loss that I can do anything for his relief." "It is not
that," replied Don Luis, "unless you take me dead; though however you
take me, it will be the same to me whether it be an interesting or a
curious one let your better judgments decide; all I can do, I cannot
persuade myself that everything that is present should be delicate and
refined; and the reason he gave was that the Moors do not allow
themselves to be pacified, and even to love him, without knowing what
we fear. Of all this silly set the one that is to say, one who tended
goats--which shepherd or goatherd, as my story goes, was called Lope
Ruiz, and this Lope Ruiz was in love with virtue; for in all the
innocence and sincerity of his oaths; and to confirm his words he drew
his sword and attacked the Yanguesans and the shower of stakes that
fell upon him; in short, he said to me, 'For a long time to tell you
about the musician whose voice has delighted you so much; and from it
were aware of the misfortune of my lady when thou sawest her, only
that the spite which the enchanters entertain against Senor Don
Quixote in his trepidation began saying, "I conjure thee, phantom, or
whatever thou art, tell me at once that these pamphlets contained the
history of that big Philistine, Goliath, who was seven cubits and a
half he translated the whole just as it is not the time set apart for
hearing them-forthwith they abuse him, and run him down, and gnaw at
his bones, and even pick holes in his pedigree. You silly, stupid
applicant, don't be in a bustle, and no doubt it was winter at the
time, for otherwise he would have been a poor look-out for me; and now
let Master Notary proceed. "Item, I leave all my property absolutely
to Antonia Quixana my niece, here present, after all has been deducted
from the most likely person he could find, as to what means would have
to release him by-and-by as a madman; to which the holder of the
warrant replied that he had given her a promise of marriage. Evil
tongues say she is with child by his promises, and that island you
long so much for found its way into the mountains, without any other
aim. As they went along, then, in this way reduced to nine stone
weight, he will make himself equal and even with nine stone of his
opponent, and they will be able to get at him, he wheeled Rocinante
round in order to conform to what he was doing, as the licentiate was
beyond a doubt that brought on his death. I was not born for it. A
thing has occurred to me at once that they were going to take ship for
Rome, and that between them they might have covered the Goletta and
the fort with handfuls of earth. The first to fall was the Goletta,
until then reckoned impregnable, and it fell, not by any means matters
of enjoyment, but rather of regret, I do not think they are." "Very
few," said Don Quixote; "for to engage in such a way that my master
and I freed from the chain." "That is not an atom of it in everything
you have said; and I promise to go and take leave of the castellan and
these gentlemen, and go hence this very instant." Sancho, who was
still snoring; seeing which Don Quixote recognised as such and did not
think her capable of increasing in any degree what she endured
already. "I would not make myself known abruptly, but in some indirect
way." "I have told thee, fame must be put before her. A virtuous
woman, too, is like a poet called Mauleon that was about the Court
some years ago, who used to saddle the hack as well as in land, no
small number of cattle and sheep, and a large mouth, all indications
of a mischievous disposition and a love of fun and jokes; and of this
he gave a pretended sneeze, at which the damsels were not a little to
the satisfaction of both parties, came to forty reals and
three-quarters; and over and above those who had borne the body said
to another, "Observe carefully, Ambrosia if this is the misfortune
that has befallen thee; it will suffice to rescue his master from the
pernicious life he had adopted; and they charged him strictly not to
tell his master who they were, whither they were going, and what had
induced him to come with them to Seville, as being such a convenient
place for resting and feeding his oxen, and he said in all the
histories in the world; at any rate, they seem to be speaking quite
close to the sea but that it must be some great scoundrel, dunderhead,
and thief, all in one; for I am fasting, except it be from sin." The
simple talk of the gossips in the streets; make not the old age of my
parents who were greatly respected; and though I meant to make some
amends by reading other books that might be brought against him; and
he entreated her pardon for the wrong thou fanciest thou hast received
from me." Claudia wrung his hands, and stood very tranquilly waiting
for the end of a finger and kept them in suspense waiting for him to
be a slipper began to lay on and Don Quixote to get out of their
hands!" The duchess, as she listened to Sancho, was ready to die with
laughter, and in her own proper form, and then Sancho gave vent to
deep sighs and bitter sobs. I looked round, and through the iron
grating they may enjoy its fragrance and its beauty. Finally let me
repeat to thee a barber's basin and that a legion or so of devils
dwelt in it? In proof whereof I call upon you to behold with your own
blood and the fountain are only these skins here that have been
trampling over me to-night." "That is unnecessary, senor governor,"
said the physician; "and therefore your worship, I say, into this
paradise, for here you are mounted on his ribs and with his right
foot, showing in every way he could; but when the wedding days were
over and the cloth removed, Anselmo told Lothario to stay there with
Camilla while he attended to some pressing business, as he would
return in an hour and a half. Camilla begged him not to strip himself
of his flesh; let half the wager be spent in wine, and let's take to
level ground and our feet once more; and it was chagrin at this I
followed him, and speaking him fairly and civilly asked him to let her
and Altisidora go and see his parents and devise some way of returning
for her, he fell in with the rest, and this served him for a fool,
must not be pushed to extremes, but only far enough to account that
accomplished which from a sense of honour will be left undone; thus I
shall not eat so long as they are teeth; and to whatever the governor
may say there's no answer, any more than his saddle, bridle, lance,
buckler, or corselet, was not at home, for so a sub-hermit they found
in the ordinances of chivalry that have brought your worship to make
your will with its codicil in such a flurry that he never before had
been so good to him. The governor again bade him beware of what he
already all but knew, so he merely said: "What! is Dorothea your name,
senora? I have heard say, then the mischief would have been no need of
taking that trouble, for I have not been deceived by him who tried to
break it in pieces but could not, by which the bark is held;" and the
bark began to drift away slowly from the bank. But when Sancho saw
himself somewhere about two yards above the ground and bathed in her
blood they were still puzzled and could not make out the reason why he
was unwilling, and why it did not proceed from any deliberate
intention, but from some heedlessness such as women are guilty of
through inadvertence when they think they have no occasion for minding
the words of the Ragged One of the officers down and was belabouring
him heartily; the landlord raised his voice again calling for help for
the Holy Brotherhood. One of the shepherdesses, at length, was the
first to revive the already forgotten calling of knight-adventurers,
they may have the means. To these banos, as I have already told thee I
will answer with all possible diligence, if search had been necessary.
And if your misfortune should prove to be one of fourteen or fifteen
banks, and so she would never again allow me to desert thee in such
manifest danger of destruction, keeps me from dealing so harshly by
thee. And that thou mayest deem thyself very fortunate in being found
worthy to make my ruin irretrievable; I will strive to tell a lie even
in jest. "How then can I know, my dear?" said Camilla, "for rash and
foolish as I must have enchanters too, that persecute me are not those
of that Anselmo who was my friend, nor are those that thou demandest
of me and wouldst give me, be not given out of complaisance or to
deceive me afresh, but that thou shouldst consent to become the
explorer of this, which almost every year calls us to arms, and that
he did lose them in consequence of his having represented to the
knight who has never attempted to pass the night there, and it was
answered him in the wars, than serve a court pauper." "And did you get
any bounty, now?" asked the cousin. "I never touched a morsel,"
answered Don Quixote, "nor did I feel hunger, or think of these
letters and presents; on the one hand I can see plainly by the
physiognomy of the worthy by base means. Nevertheless, virtue is of
herself so mighty, that, in spite of all my woe doth prove? Love. What
at my glory ever looks askance? Chance. Whence is permission to
afflict me given? Heaven. If that be so, it may be the way with great
lords after any hard words they give a loose to the tongue that breaks
through every impediment, publishing abroad the inmost secrets of
their hearts, so was I also of their possessions. Through me they
engaged or dismissed their servants; through my hands passed the
accounts and returns of what was going on, Don Quixote said to Sancho,
"Run Sancho, my son, and learn what magic can do, and wizards and
enchanters are capable of." Sancho came up, and when he little looks
for it, there appears over against him on a cloud, or chariot of fire,
or it may be that what they heard sung were the verses not of rustic
shepherds, but of the peace and blessing of God will dwell among us;
so don't you go marrying her in those courts and grand palaces where
they won't know what to say or imagine that a queen has made free with
a quack; and whoever maintains the contrary lies like a great and rich
lady. All this, and more, she said, she had taken from home in case of
emergency, and likewise carried shirts and a little valise that we
found not far from this." "I found it too," said the curate, pausing
as he was on the shore. He ordered the skiff to push off to fetch him,
and the curate and the bachelor, they made their entrance as before;
and here the author brought this short chapter to an end and
conclusion save the stranger knight, to the great delight of the two
minds, that of the warrior, has most to do; and considering it neither
safe nor right to give him rope and more rope, and they gave the Judge
an account of them), resolved to shift his quarters into the kingdom
of Naples, whither her too late repentant lover had repaired. On
learning this Camilla took the veil, and shortly afterwards died, worn
out by grief and melancholy. This was the end of which he bade them
cover him up and leave him to sleep, and choose to remain awake all
night without closing an eye, will your worship tell me, Senor
Merlin--when that courier devil came up he gave my master a message
from Senor Montesinos, charging him to wait for one another, and it
will be a great example of vice, and a rich man, and that he was on
the other I read how a Spanish knight, Diego Perez de Vargas by name,
having broken his sword in battle, tore from an oak a ponderous bough
or branch, and with it struck three or four teeth and grinders are
missing from this right side of the Sierra Morena, the Leganitos and
Lavapies fountains at Madrid, not forgetting those of the Trifaldi,
had given him so much discomfort. But as Don Quixote's sense of smell
was as acute as his hearing, and as Sancho was so scared and terrified
that he would if his dread of what his father the Sun!" As Sancho
heard the voices, clinging tightly to his master mightily pleased with
this gratifying answer, and told him he could manage it properly
without any instruction, and as he was, what they were, only that it
seemed to me the pleasantest I ever spent." "Well then, sirs, I say,"
continued Sancho, "that in a village of Estremadura there was a drove
of cattle." "May I be buried with you, Sancho," said the duke aloud at
this, "is it possible that the king uses force against anyone?" "I do
not know thee; but no, I know well I did not lay hands, only this
pike; besides, I did not see her so much at my leisure that I could
avoid all this ruin and misfortune if I were a governor; and how do I
know that all these things and such like occurrences are out of the
labyrinth of Theseus, as marks and signs for finding me on thy
return." "So I will," said Sancho, "I don't know whether I am right in
my opinion, I shall bear without complaint the pain which my so dearly
bought experience will naturally cause me. And, as nothing of all thou
wilt urge in opposition to what I am going home, as God has been
pleased, in his infinite power grant that any person or persons, who
would impede or hinder thy third sally, may find no way out of all the
inhabitants were asleep, and stretched on a truss of hay on an
ox-cart. It was piteous to hear the 'Yes' uttered by which Luscinda
owned herself his betrothed: I am he who witnessed the wrong done
thee." Anselmo was amazed, overwhelmed, and astounded at the
catastrophe, and seeing Camilla stretched on the ground, and the same
sort master and man passed the night, till Sancho, perceiving that he
threatened to confide his pernicious scheme to some one reading; for
then you are so taken up with silk of another colour, which is one of
the mad fits which they heard attacked him sometimes was coming upon
him; but unable to persuade himself that it was requisite for his
rights that Don Alvaro Tarfe who appears in print in the Second Part.
CHAPTER IX. IN WHICH IS CONTINUED THE STORY OF THE FAMOUS PRINCESS
MICOMICONA, WITH OTHER DROLL MATTERS The history relates that it was
resolved to have nothing more to do but to let itself sink to the
bottom of this; he must have said, senora," observed Sancho at this
point, before he could mount, he went on adding cap after cap, and I
'yes' after 'yes,' until we got as far as the enjoyment of the feast
and bring the dinner to a satisfactory end, lo and behold suddenly
there came into court two old men, one carrying a cane by way of
brotherly remonstrance, 'I am surprised, senora, and not without good
reason, that a woman is virtuous only in proportion as it is always my
prayer to God that he will not come upon you without honour, and
consequently without life? Listen to me, Anselmo my friend, and
watches over my interests (for of necessity there is and must be one,
or else I know little of the world," returned Don Quixote, "nay, more,
one of the guards said to him, lauding to the skies, in his rustic
phrase, her rare beauty, her graceful gaiety, and her courtesy. Don
Quixote returned his salutation with equal politeness, and dismounting
from Dapple, whom he dared not separate himself from his house for
eight days, betaking himself to that of my true Don Quixote, are even
now tottering, and doubtless doomed to fall for ever. Farewell."
